Israel's prime minister insists the war
on Gaza will continue despite growing
anger over the Israeli Army's killing of
three captives their families are
demanding the government do more to
ensure those held by Hamas are released
so can a deal be agreed to free them and
secure a new truce this is inside
store
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
fully batibo Israel's prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has again declared
the military campaign in Gaza will not
stop until Hamas is defeated but with
more than a 100 Israelis being held by
the group in the strip he's facing
growing public anger and pressure to do
more to secure their release to make
matters worse Israel's Army says it
mistakenly killed three Israeli captives
as they were holding a white flag during
a military offensive that's led to
thousands of Israelis protesting in Tel
Aviv the head of Israel's intelligence
agency meanwhile mad has now met senior
cies in Europe in another attempt to
secure a prisoner swap so Canen
Netanyahu agree a deal after failing to
secure the release of all the captives
and how is he dealing with their
family's anger we'll discuss all this in
just a moment but this report by
Victoria
gonb this was the message to the Israeli
government from relatives of captives
held by Hamas many at the protest in Tel
Aviv are increasingly angry and
frustrated at the government's strategy
every day that passes is a danger to
their lives I was there my daughter was
there do not abandon the hostages we
must act now a deal is required today
bring them home now the killing of three
captives by Israeli soldiers has shocked
the country Israel's military says the
men emerged from a building in Northern
Gaza with one waving a white flag but
two soldiers opened fire killing two
instantly the third returned to the
building and cried out for help in
Hebrew but was also shot dead when he
reemerged an Israeli military official
says the actions were against our Rules
of Engagement prime minister Benjamin
yahu said the killing of the captives
broke his
heart we will learn and apply the
lessons with all deep sorrow I want to
make it clear the military pressure is
necessary both for the return of the
abductees and for achieving victory over
our enemy more than 100 Israelis were
released last month as part of a
ceasefire agreement between Israel and
Hamas that was mediated by katar
Palestinian prisoners were released from
Israeli jails as part of the deal the
relatives of the captiv say the
government must work towards another
ceasefire and an exchange of prisoners
wake up and uh go back to the Israeli
moral code and make sure that these all
the kidnapps are returned as soon as
possible and that that should be the
highest agenda and it should be done
with
negotiations relatives here welcome
reports of a meeting between the head of
Israel's intelligence agency mosad and
katar's prime minister in Europe on
Friday they say the government must do
whatever it takes to bring all the
captives back alive Victoria gonb for
Inside
[Music]
Story let's now bring in our guests from
Tel Aviv is Alan liel former director
general of Israel's Ministry of Foreign
Affairs who's been part of a diplomatic
team advising the captives families from
London y meckelberg associate fellow of
the Middle East and North Africa program
at chattam house and here in Doha is
Sultan Barakat professor of public
policy at hammad bin Khalifa University
gentlemen thank you all for joining us
uh Alan leel in Tel Aviv let me start
with you you're part of the Diplomatic
team advising the families of the
captives we heard prime minister
Netanyahu say that he is uh heartbroken
by uh the killing of these three
captives which he called a akake but at
the same time he said that Israel's uh
war will continue in Gaza until its
objectives are achieved what has been
the reaction first of all of the
families the contact between the Prime
Minister and the cabinet and the
families are going on all the time that
quite
tense everybody wants to release the
hostages and the matter is most mostly
priorities and
timetable H the family is obviously put
the release or exchange of hostages as
the number one priority and the Prime
Minister and cabinet put the removal of
Hamas as the number one priority also
the timetable is a big issue because
there is a a fear a worry here in the
cabinet that if we will do another stage
of exchanging hostages and prisoners and
it will take time H it will or enable
the Hamas to get organized or to be the
end of the war and they don't want to
end the war so these are the dilemas
here dilemas Alan but what do the
families make of how the Israeli
government is handling the situation uh
you know they've expressed their
grievances of course in meetings with
the prime minister is the government
showing any signs of empathy of
compassion towards these
families yeah definitely but the
government believes at least claims all
the time that the military pressure the
military attacks of the Israeli Defense
Forces are helping the release of the
hostages the families say that otherwise
the families say no they're endangering
the hostages and so far the result last
week was a tragic result of more bodies
and no hostage released Although our
forces are moving forward so the
families expect a ceasefire diplomatic
efforts serious
talks under the mechanism that was
already already established Qatar Egypt
the United States and the SIDS and the
government is in probably no Hur okay
we'll come back to the talks in just a
moment because indeed there is uh
discussion of the talks resuming but
under what terms it's unclear yet but y
let me come to you and ask you about
your thoughts uh as to what's happening
inside Israel right now Israelis are
stunned there's anger as we've seen in
Tel Aviv after the killing of these
three captives by the Israeli milit AR
how much more pressure does this put on
prime minister Netanyahu more than 70
days into this war and is the country as
United and as uh fully behind this
campaign in Gaza as it was in the early
stages of the war thank you I try to
unpack you know the questions the
important question you asked me I think
first of all it refers you know the
empathy of course goes from all all
quarters towards the families of the the
hostages and the hostages themselves
but as Alone says it's a matter of
priority and it's become more and more
apparent that continuing the war not
having a ceire will and put under
dangers severe dangers the the the
hostages I whether it's the the
bombardment or as we see what the the
tragic mistake that took place on on on
Friday so I think we need to separate
now instead to put the hostages as
number one priority and the war is as a
secondary to it otherwise I'm I'm
fearful for the fail of of the of of the
of the hostages now we have to remember
that right now the Israel government is
a discredited one definitely the Prime
Minister he was discredited you know
even before the war let's bear in mind
the demonstration the protest against
him
for embarking on on a on a Judicial
so-called reform more Rec than than than
reforms so at least half of the
population probably more didn't so his
his his policies as as as not legitimate
and I think what happened past 7 October
the see both not a legitimate and but
also an incompetent prime minister while
he's is is running a war that also
discrediting Israel a b so I think at at
at this point part of the problem is
netan still in power and I think the
voices to replace him are getting more
cers than ever so he is under pressure
Sultan Barakat your thoughts the
Israelis admitting that their soldiers
broke Rules of Engagement uh when they
killed these three captives and the
account of how the captives died has
raised questions about the conduct of of
uh the Israeli Army within Israel but of
course the Palestinians will will tell
you that this has already happened on
several occasions when Palestinians who
have been trying to flee were uh killed
by the Israeli Army what would will you
do you think think first of all will be
the Fallout from from this incident for
the Netanyahu
government right well I think the
incident first shown that as you rightly
pointed out Israel does not take
hostages Israel is not interested in
taking prisoners from uh amongst Hamas
they're interested in killing them off
and this is the agenda of Netanyahu the
other uh clear uh uh lesson I think is
that the release of hostages is not
netanyahu's priority either right from
the very beginning had he had the
intention of releasing the hostages the
whole strategy would have been very very
different uh what the what the position
he finds himself in at the moment I
think as a result of having engaged in
the short pause end of November he has
weakened his hand in a number of ways
first of all he has now allowed U
humanit assistance into Gaza and he
could not turn off that t with the
withdrawal from the talks that he did at
the end of November until today the
humanitarian system is going it's not
going in the amount that everybody is is
wishing for but it has been continued
there are more than 40 United Nation
International staff that has that have
entered Gaza and are potentially
increased liability for Netanyahu and in
fact few days ago his own cabinet has
approved under pressure from the United
States to open uh K uh
the crossing of
Abu yeah and that in itself is is really
has weakened his negotiation
position uh situation in butan he he
believes in the Israeli War cabinet
believes that it was the ground
operation and the pressure on Hamas that
led to the first deal to return the
captives and that's why they want to
press on with their offensive because
they believe it allows maximum pressure
and leverage to strike further exchange
deals what what do you think about that
and and do you think that there can be a
new deal uh with you know the the
katar's reportedly meeting with the
mosad chief in in Norway can there be a
new deal and if there can be under what
conditions well I don't agree with with
his understanding that uh that violence
is L Hamas to negotiate Hamas from day
one their objective was to release their
own prisoners from Israeli jails and
they came out and said uh this is why
we've captured these people we're
willing to exchange and uh they've also
offered from the very beginning to
release uh the civilians and in
particular the international uh passport
holders uh to Greater extent they have
met those objectives in terms of uh you
know unon their word when the pose was
was introduced uh but at the moment I
think nahu again I think is in a very
difficult position he's either uh he can
continue killing more civilians and now
he's edged on
20,000 Palestinians which is really
turning the world slowly against him or
he can seek another opportunity for
negotiation I suspect one of the reasons
why they are moving the talks to Oso or
starting the engagement in Oso it's to
help him climb down on his previous
position he's now able to say that you
know couldn't really do it again in DHA
because DHA is the home for Hamas uh we
are having we are forcing them to move
elsewhere also from a Palestinian
perspective now that they move into this
second potentially second phase of
negotiations they will be asking for
much higher value Prisoners the ones
that Netanyahu released earlier were
mostly women and and young men and
children who were really released on the
same humanitarian basis because they
were released in exchange for women and
children held by Hamas let bring yeah
I'll come back to the next phase but I
think I'll bring in Alan to just uh
respond to what you've just said there
uh Alan Sultan says Netanyahu is under
pressure will he seek another uh
possibility to negotiate another deal
you think to to secure the release of
more
captives oh obviously everybody's under
pressure situation is horrible I would
say um but regarding the hostages
release as far as we know here the
mechanism was not
broken a Qatar is still
interested many of us were not sure that
Qatar will stay in the mechanism and
without Qatar it cannot work because
there is no a strong a tie direct tie to
to Hamas and I think as as far as we
know the mechanism is working now the
sides have to be serious about it come
with offers with offers the demand of
Kamas as we know it is that they're
ready to negotiate if the deal will be
the final Act of the war if the deal of
exchange of all for all all prisoners
versus all hostages will end the war and
on the Israeli side I think netan is
backed here by the public that Israel
cannot end the war at this stage so I
think diplomacy can Bridge such a gap
and we should sit and seriously discuss
all the options and what worries me is
that last time they were talking about
almost every day we got more details on
the mechanism on the method and now we
hear nothing so I don't think they're
seriously discussing the issue yet okay
you'll see your thoughts about what uh
Allan said there uh what what are
netanyahu's options right now is their
interest in securing a new deal and
under what terms as far as the Israelis
are
concerned I think we saw that actually
in the the first phase of it when there
was a pose an exchange of of ostes for
for prisoners actually the mechanisms
work very well on the whole so I think
we should go back that and we heard time
and again from the the katar
interlocutors that they are willing to
continue this negotiating and bring the
sides closer to together obviously it
broke down the the negotiation broke
down two weeks ago sadly so and and and
the war was resumed but I think this
point is to continue and and I think
it's it's it's very important it's the
more difficult negotiation because of
the kind of hostages and and prisoners
that are going to be released or
discussed negotiated in in in in this in
this negotiation what's called high
valued prisoners but it's doable and all
for all is still a possibility the only
problem with it yes is there is a prime
minister in Israel we were not so sure
whether his personal motives are
overtaking the the interest of the
country and in this case of the hostages
and the second thing is that the window
for this to happen is closing as the war
continues and in a smaller and smaller
space I think the window of opportunity
to to release the tiges and to reach a
deal is closing very quickly uh Sultan
your thoughts about what Yosi said there
he said the all for all deal is still a
possibility under what conditions would
the Palestinian armed groups now agree
to to uh another exchange of of
prisoners for
captives yes I think as as Now we move
into exchange of soldiers because this
is the majority of what remains with
Hamas Are Soldiers be it women or men
and as you know the last time the talks
broken down because Israel wanted to
pass or tried to pass some of the women
hostages as just Fe civilian females and
Hamas saw them as soldiers and that uh
led to the breakdown of the talks now as
they move into this critical phase they
will be looking for their own high value
prisoners to be released from Israeli
prisons but for those there is there is
a need for Guarantee of their safety and
the fact that they will not be rounded
up again Israel since they started the
talks have rounded up thousands of
Palestinians uh just since the 7th of
October but those political leaders that
are likely be on the list for Hamas uh
there is a need for a third country to
come in and try and work either
relocation of some kind of guarantee for
them because they need to get them out
of reach of Israel now that's one of the
reasons I suspect Norway is may may
become involved in this given its very
strong relationship with the US and the
fact that globally it has been working
very very closely with the US for a
number of years Alan uh Sultan mentioned
the us there and Netanyahu we heard in
his news conference uh say that not even
International pressure would prevent
Israel from achieving its goals it he
says and we have the US defense
secretary back in the region uh in in
these next few days after what appears
to be a shift in tone from the Biden
Administration do you think the
Americans can still play a critical role
here look I think we should separate
here between the day after the war and
the
hostages regarding the day after the
war the Israeli position is very
different from the
American Netanyahu says I will stay
there until I have in fact I'm not
quoting exactly a friendly leadership of
Gaza and I don't think the Americans
expect us to stay h one day after the
war in any of the territory of Gaza this
is a very big difference but when we
come to the hostages the Americans can
put a lot of pressure they have a
leverage on the on the SS especially on
Israel to create a a window of two weeks
without even speaking if the war will
continue afterwards and I don't think
enough pressure is a applied on Israel
regarding the hostages and if it is
applied it is such in a such polite way
that the Middle Eastern sides do not see
it as any threat yeah Yos see uh do you
agree with that I mean can the Americans
put a a lot more pressure on Israel than
they're currently doing when it comes to
the hostage uh the the captives crisis
and um what will you know what will they
be saying to the Israelis right now even
if Netanyahu says that he will not bow
to International
pressure yeah first I think yes the the
United States has all the power to
influence Israel and and probably more
so than for a very long time United
States supported Israel from day one of
of of of this war from the from from the
the very first day of the attack by
Hamas on 7 October sent a aircraft
carriers group to to the region
supported with with amunition
politically Vos in in in the security
Council ceasefire resolution so all of
this put it in a in a unique position to
influence influence Israel however there
is a huge dissonance between what the
United States says and how it acts it
says there is a need for it's a need for
there is a there is a need to reduce the
casualties more I but at the same time
the way it acts is actually almost
encourag Isel to continue and I think
when this dissonance will will change
and close then we can start thinking
about a the end of the war and B the day
after how Gaza is going to be governed
yeah but but some us officials at the
same time have expressed concern Yosi
that some of netanyahu's positions on
the war are rooted in a bid to prolong
the conflict uh to prolong his political
survival I should say and and he seems
to suggest that he's going to go at this
alone uh even if you know the US doesn't
want him to but can
he well no because he needs the support
we see it even you know conducting war
and bear in mind it's not only one front
right now there is on a lower level
there is a front in the north there is a
front in in the west bank and to a
certain extent also for you know what
happens with with the hes I think this
is that's where Israel needs the United
States it doesn't mean that Israel
should do everything that Washington ask
is to do but at the same time it's
almost inconceivable that that netan
again to a large extent to his own
personal interest to prolong the to
prolong the war and in also to stay as a
result in power would ignore completely
the country that provides support
political economic diplomatic Al through
this period and obviously before and
Israel will need the United States in in
rebuilding Gaza in governance in
ensuring security so I'm not so sure
this is advisable for Israel to ignore
the United States but I think the Biden
Administration needs to step up its game
sultan your thoughts can the US still
play a critical role
here of course I think the US is holds
the key for for the whole situation at
the moment I think with Christmas
approaching very fast we're now less
than 10 days maybe a week to Christmas
be very difficult for the Biden
Administration to justify the level of
violence Netanyahu is conducting in in
the Gaza Street also be very difficult
for the families of the hostages to go
through uh the Christmas period again
having not been reunited internationally
the perception of all this is is must be
very very troubling and it must be part
of the pressure on Netanyahu if you go
back to the November the release
happened on on Thanksgiving Day when it
when the US was celebrating and that was
really designed to give Biden a break uh
so Netanyahu is very aware of what and
how the US is finding itself more and
more isolated internationally because of
the way they vetoed in the security
Council then they found themselves among
a minority of 10 at the general assembly
against the whole of the world not
calling for an immediate ceasefire and
he he he we all aware that he's trying
to extend the war status he's interested
and this is why he declared the war in
the first place this is the first time
since 1973 he practically hijacked the
public op the public vote in Israel no
one except for his manyi War cabinet can
now take decisions on how he moves uh
within uh within this conflict so it is
in his interest to try and extend it as
much as possible but it's not in the
interest of the Israeli public it's not
in the interest of the hostages or their
uh families and the sooner I think he
comes back back to the table to
negotiate the release the better and
think the pressure internationally is
really mounting very very quickly Alan
let me give you the the final word what
what uh do you think might happen in the
next few days are you hopeful are the
families hopeful that they could be
another deal to secure the release of
more captives and a truce in
Gaza ER the mood among the families is
pessimistic I must say I personally hope
that what happened to us with killing
three of the hostages after they
surrendered and showed us
surrendering is a an unbelievable shock
to the public I hope this tragedy will
trigger a change in the priorities of
the cabinet and I hope that H by the end
of this week we'll have serious
negotiations for the next phase of
release and
exchange thank you very much gentlemen
for a very interesting conversation Alan
leel Y meckelberg and Sultan Barakat
thanks to all three of you for joining
us on inside story today and thank you
too for watching you can always watch
this program again anytime by visiting
our website at aljazeera.com for further
discussion you can go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and of
course you can join the conversation on
X handle is at AJ inside story from me
FY btio and the whole team here in Doha
thank you very much for watching we see
you
[Music]
soon